At Psalm 68:5,
Jehovah is called
“a father of the fatherless.”
Are you a fatherless child?
Or do you have a fatherless child
or fatherless children in your congregation?
You may be wondering,
‘What do we mean by fatherless child?’
Well, in the context of our discussion,
we’re talking about young people
who have only one believing parent
—one parent in the truth.
Now, that allows
for a spectrum of possibilities:
It could be a single-parent family;
it could be a religiously divided family,
and especially when the unbeliever
is opposed;
it could even include a situation
where only one parent
is actively serving Jehovah.
I was five years old when my mother
learned the truth from the Bible.
For some years,
I lived in a religiously divided home.
And eventually,
my mother became a single parent,
and we dealt with those circumstances.
There are many of us here at Bethel
or in the field pioneering,
serving as missionaries,
circuit overseers,
construction workers
—many of us who
have experienced similar circumstances.
Interestingly, in the Bible,
Jehovah saw fit to include
the life experience of a young man
who grew up
in a religiously divided home
—Timothy.
The Bible describes him as having
‘a believing Jewish mother
but a Greek father.’
He had only one parent who served Jehovah.
And we know that his mother, Eunice,
and his grandmother Lois
were instrumental in helping him
become well-founded in the truth.
But the Scriptures indicate
that others had a share
in his spiritual advancement as well.
And that’s where all of us
come into this conversation.
All of us, like Jehovah,
need to appreciate the fatherless children
in our congregations.
We should view them as modern-day Timothys.
How do we do that?
Well, we can learn a lot
from the apostle Paul.
Late in the year 49 or early 50 C.E.,
the apostle Paul,
on his second missionary journey,
visited the city of Lystra
and there he observed Timothy
—and not just in a casual way.
Paul really saw Timothy.
He observed his potential,
and he took the initiative
to provide training
so that Timothy could realize that potential.
That’s a beautiful example for us.
We need to take note of
and encourage
the fatherless children in our midst.
The apostle Paul set a nice example
in something that he wrote to Timothy.
In the year 65 C.E.,
Paul was a prisoner in Rome
with no prospect of being released.
In fact, his death was imminent
—time to write one more letter.
To whom did he write?
To Timothy
—his beloved “child in the faith.”
And what did he have to say to Timothy
in this last inspired letter?
Let’s read it together,
2 Timothy chapter 1,
2 Timothy 1:5:
“For I recall your unhypocritical faith,
“which dwelled first in your grandmother Lois
“and your mother Eunice,
but which I am confident is also in you.”
Did you notice what Paul did?
In just a few words,
he commended and expressed confidence
in Timothy
and he also commended Timothy’s mother
and grandmother
—didn’t he?—
for their “unhypocritical faith.”
For Lois and Eunice,
serving Jehovah was not playacting.
Their faith was genuine.
What a blessing for Timothy
that proved to be!
Well, in a similar way,
we can offer
specific, sincere, heartfelt commendation
to fatherless children
and their parents
and commend them
for what they’re able to do.
Include them
in spiritual and recreational activities.
When I was a boy,
my grandmother used to pick me up
every Saturday morning
and take me in the ministry.
I never had to wonder if she was coming,
and I never had to wonder
who I would work with.
The book study conductor, an older brother,
would always include my grandmother and me
in the group with him and his wife.
I cherish those memories.
Pay close attention now
as some who grew up
in single-parent homes
explain how they were encouraged
to be successful fighters for the faith.
It felt like a bad dream.
Our family was really zealous in the truth.
We were playing downstairs one day,
and Mom came down to tell us
she was leaving Jehovah and leaving Dad.
Saying goodbye to Mom,
that was the hardest day of my life.
My mother and father became inactive
when I was about four years old.
My father was never really around.
When my mom started to learn the truth,
my dad said she was forbidden from studying.
If we were to go to the meetings,
he would take us out forcibly.
He became verbally and physically abusive
to my mom.
My parents’ breakup was very tough.
It was a struggle for my mother
to raise two boys on her own.
She would work two or three jobs,
and serving Jehovah just took a backseat.
When my parents divorced,
my mom was very depressed.
She did the best she could,
but Jehovah didn’t intend for mothers
to fill both roles
as parents.
My sisters and I,
we made a conscious choice
that we weren’t going to make
the same bad choices that Mom did.
We realized that it was up to us.
So I dedicated my life to Jehovah
and was baptized when I was 15.
We thrived spiritually
when we didn’t have the opposition from Dad.
Now we could go out in service,
go to the meetings freely.
We didn’t have to hide our literature
for fear he would rip them up.
When I was around 15 years old,
my mother took us to the meeting,
and she was determined
that this was going to be her last meeting.
It was the night of a local needs part.
It was the right time.
Jehovah just opened my mother’s heart wide.
After that experience,
it was like she was a new woman.
My sisters and I have always been a team.
We pioneered together; we moved to Cambodia
to serve as need-greaters together.
They’re both in special full-time service
with their husbands in Cambodia,
and I’ve been serving here in Myanmar Bethel,
along with my husband,
for just over 11 years now.
My mom set a stellar example
for me to follow.
Her relationship with Jehovah
was always above everything else.
It was her example that helped me
to set and reach spiritual goals.
I started pioneering
during my senior year of high school.
In nearly 20 years of full-time service,
I’ve spent most of that time
at Brooklyn Bethel and Warwick with my wife.
My mother had a very strong influence
on my theocratic goals.
My wife and I had the privilege of attending
the first School for Kingdom Evangelizers,
and currently we’re serving
in the circuit work.
No one needs to be defined
by their negative circumstances.
First Peter 5:10 says:
‘God himself will complete your training.’
It might be tough at times,
but with Jehovah’s help, you can succeed.
It reminds me of what David said
in the 27th Psalm and verse 10;
he said: “Even if my . . . father [or] mother
abandon me,
Jehovah . . . will take me in.”
That was definitely the case
in my situation.
Jehovah doesn’t define us
by our upbringing or our past.
He sees our potential.
So it’s up to us.
With Jehovah,
we can be anything we want to be.
Well, we appreciate
those beautiful expressions.
So those of you who are fatherless children,
how do you see yourself?
Do you see yourself as Jehovah sees you,
as a unique individual with potential?
Certainly, you’re not inferior in any way
because of your circumstances.
Did you appreciate the comments
made by those in the video?
Your circumstances don’t have to define you.
Negative circumstances and upbringing
do not have to define you.
We would add this:
Your unique experience in life
gives you a unique perspective,
and Jehovah may be able
to use you to help others.
So be a Timothy.
At a young age, relatively speaking,
Timothy was a spiritual man
and entrusted with responsibility.
The apostle Paul described him
as having a disposition like no one else’s.
Timothy cared for others.
You can do the same.
Reach out!
Be a pioneer, a Bethelite,
a field missionary, a construction worker,
a circuit overseer.
You young brothers,
qualify and reach out
to be a ministerial servant
and then an elder.
The opportunities are endless.
Allow Jehovah to use you,
and continue to cultivate appreciation
for your loyal parent.
I know I appreciate my mother very much
for her fine example of faith
through a number
of very trying circumstances.
We don’t take the faithfulness
of our single parents
for granted.
Well, in conclusion,
we want to assure you
that you can be
a successful fighter for the faith,
just as Timothy was.
We have confidence in you,
and we pray Jehovah’s continued rich blessing
on your service to him.
Brother Joel Dellinger,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will consider the final talk
of this symposium,
“Successful Fighters for the Faith
—Single Christians.”